The final lesson is more open ended.
We're gonna be talking
about strategies for
testing the state machines that we built.
We're also gonna be talking about the flip
side of that in using state machines for
what's known as model based testing,
in which we could test any application
whether they're using state machines or
not.
And then the floor is open to other
topics and questions that you may have.
So the machines that we created
are pretty amenable to testing, and
there is a guide in the documentation for
how exactly to test these machines.
So remember that the machines
have a transition function and
this transition function
is a pure function.
So probably the simplest way to test
this is to have an expected value.
So for example,
let's say we have a traffic light and
the expected value is yellow.
So if we transition,
if we have a state of green and
a timer event happens, then we expect
that this state should be yellow.
So we could do actual state.matches
yellow and check if it's truthy.
And so basically the same way that
you would unit test functions,
you can unit test state machines by
unit testing the transition function.
And you don't need to just verify that
the state is correct you could also
verify that the actions that the state
is going to execute is correct,
you can verify that it receives
the right event and other things too.
Now, in testing services is where it
gets a little bit more intersting.
So when you test services these
should really be treated as
async tests, so
you could use a promise, or
what I'd like to do is in Jest or
Mocha you could use done.
And so basically for example,
in this machine, what we're saying
is that we want to test that the machine
eventually reaches a certain state.
And so that's what we're doing in here,
we have this on transition callback that
is called whenever the state transitions.
And so we could check that if the machine
eventually ends up in this success state,
then we're done.
And so then the test succeeds.
What we could also do is we could
have an expect call over here and
make additional assertions on that state.
And then Jest has this feature where
you could say expect.assertions and
see the number of assertions
that you expect to happen.
So again, testing services is
more of an acing thing and
testing the actual machine logic can be
done in your normal unit testing fashion.
Now, because machines
are configurable all of
the implementation details
can really be mocked.
So in the machine basically has
a built in way of doing this.
So just using the same width config
callback that we've been using
in previous exercises,
you can provide alternatives for actions,
services, guards, delays and
other things, especially in the future.
And so that way you can mock responses for
example if we have a fetch from
API service that's invoked.
We could provide a mock response instead
of actually trying to mock that call.
So things become a lot easier when it's
all contained in the same machine.
So those are the general strategies for
testing the application logic.
Another strategy is using the state
machine to test applications that
might not use state machines at all.
In this article I wrote we're testing
a feedback flow where we have three steps,
how was your experience?
You could answer good or bad.
If you click bad, it asks you why?
And then you could submit it.
If you answer good,
it says thanks for your feedback and
then we could close it from this button,
or this button, or that button.
So this app may or may not be implemented
with XState or state machines,
we might just be implementing it
with the old ways that we know.
But we could still use state
machines to test the application.
So in here there's a bunch of tests and
especially end to end tests
that result from this.
We have as a user if I'm on the how was
your experience screen, and I click good,
I should be on the things for
your feedback screen.
Similarly, as a user if I'm on
the form screen and I press submit,
then I should be on the things for
your feedback screen.
Or if I'm on the form screen and
I press escape, or
press this little x over here then
I should be in the closed state.
And so, instead of specifying all of these
end to end tests one by one which is
really hard to do exhaustively and takes
an enormous amount of time and effort.
It's better to represent it as
a model instead or a test model.
So this test model is a state machine,
and the state machine represents
all of your given when then
statements in a single state machine.
So now we could see each
of our specifications
are represented completely
in this machine.
For example, if we're on
the question state and we click bad,
now we're on the form state and
so on and so forth.
So this could be represented using XState,
and
then using a library called X dates test.
We could take that machine,
provide test data, and
asserts that we are in each state for
that test data.
So it also provides
a way to execute events.
And so what this is going to do,
and I'll just scroll down here,
it's going to generate all the possible
paths through the machine depending on
the configuration parameters you set.
Like how exhaustive you
want these tests to be, and
it's going to try to traverse the entire
state machine and test all of these paths.
And make sure that your app which again
might or might not use XState matches
the specification that you modeled
in that test state machine.
And so, while the learning curve here is
pretty much the same as learning state
machines and hopefully in this workshop
you surmounted that learning curve.
It really shows how state machines can be
useful in other areas rather than just
application, implementation.
So for example, this is a video
showing puppeteer running and
going through all of those test cases,
and manually, or
automatically entering
that information for
you, and making sure that
every state is what we expect.
So I encourage you to research model based
testing and see how you can use state
machine and XState tests to test
your existing applications.